
**Literature & Methodology Review**

To craft a story with both local and global dimensions, I draw upon a wide range of literatures. First and foremost, my work builds on scholarship about modern Egypt, specifically works focusing on Egypt’s foreign relations and media landscape. I also incorporate the literature on pan-Arabism and pan-Africanism, as well as the much smaller historiography on pan-Islamism, nonalignment, and Afro-Asianism. Urban historians have also produced a number of studies on Cairo, and I combine these works with more conceptual writings on spatial history. I rely heavily on the research on the United States in the World, and specifically on African Americans in Africa, international public diplomacy, as well as some of the new global intellectual histories. The larger fields of media studies and media history also inform my work, though much of this work either focuses on the Western world, or on the post-digital age in the Middle East. Lastly, I utilize the growing scholarship on the international dimensions of decolonization and the Cold War to explore the larger global context of this history. While these scholarships also inform my methodology, I also draw upon the insights of science studies, social movement and intellectual history, and the emerging fields of digital humanities and computational linguistics. This project is viable in large part because of the richness of these existing scholarships. However, I also explore how this project fills a gap that these previous works have ignored. Overall, I believe that combining these literatures is crucial for exploring both the full extent of global anti-colonialism in Cairo, and the media infrastructure that helped construct and spread these ideas.

Since the outbreak of the revolution, Gamal Abdel Nasser has been a subject of fascination for historians. Much of this earlier work from the 1950s and 1960s examined the biography of Nasser and his peers, as well as their ideas of Arab socialism, revolution, and regional unity. (NOTE:  Jean Lacoutre, Egypt in Transition. (New York, Criterion Books. 1958); Wilton Wynn, Nasser of Egypt: The Search for Dignity. (Cambridge, MA: Arlington Books, 1959); Keith Wheelock, Nasser’s New Egypt; a Critical Analysis. (New York: Praeger, 1960); Malcolm H. Kerr, Egypt under Nasser. (New York: Foreign Policy Association, 1963); Peter Mansfield, Nasser’s Egypt. (Baltimore, Penguin Books, 1965); P J. Vatikotis, Egypt Since the Revolution. (New York, Praeger, 1968); Robert Stephens, Nasser: A Political Biography. (New York, Simon and Schuster, 1971); Anthony Nutting, Nasser. (New York: E.P. Dutton, 1972). ) Many of these initial scholars were also more attentive to Egypt’s role in African and nonaligned affairs. (NOTE:  Jacques Baulin, The Arab Role in Africa. (Baltimore, Penguin Books, 1962); Tareq Y. Ismael, The U.A.R. in Africa: Egypt’s Policy Under Nasser. (Chicago, IL: Northwestern UP, 1971).) Malcolm Kerr's work on the Arab Cold War in 1971 has become foundational for studies on Arab regional affairs, and in many ways, the Sadat era, with its emphasis on de-Nasserization and economic privatization, shifted the scholarship on Egypt towards studies of political economy. (NOTE:  Malcolm H. Kerr, The Arab Cold War: Gamal ‘Abd al-Nasir and his rivals, 1958-1970. (London: Oxford UP. 1971); Raymond William Baker, Egypt’s Uncertain Revolution under Nasser and Sadat. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1978); John Waterbury, Egypt: Burdens of the Past, Options for the Future. (Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1978); Israel Gershoni, The Emergence of pan-Arabism in Egypt, (Tel Aviv, 1981); John Waterbury, The Egypt of Nasser and Sadat: the Political Economy of Two Regimes. (New Jersey: Princeton UP, 1983); Raymond A. Hinnebusch, Egyptian Politics under Sadat: the Post-Populist Development of the Authoritarian-Modernizing State. (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1985).) The Mubarak era resulted in a new openness to examine Nasser, and many of the works from this era rely on oral history interviews with key figures from the Free Officer's and Nasser regime. (NOTE:  Anthony McDermott, Egypt from Nasser to Mubarak: a Flawed Revolution. (London: Croom Helm, 1988); Ismael Hoseein-zadeh, Soviet Non-Capitalist Development: the Case of Nasser’s Egypt. (New York: Praeger, 1989); Israel Gershoni, The Emergence of Pan-Arabism in Egypt. (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv UP, 1984).) The advent of the cultural and social turns also produced a growing emphasis on non-elite Egyptians and media spaces, from workers and peasants to television and soap operas. (NOTE:  See Joel Beinin, Was the Red flag flying there? Marxist politics and the Arab-Israeli conflict in Egypt and Israel, 1948-1965. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990); Samah Selim, The Novel and the Rural Imaginary in Egypt, 1880-1985 (New York: Routledge Curzon, 2004); Michael Gasper, The Power of Representation: Publics, Peasants and Islam in Egypt (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2009).) For example, Joel Gordon's *Revolutionary Melodrama, * published in 1998 delves into the more international and ideational elements of the Nasser regime through the lens of films. In this book, Gordon explores the relationship between cinema and politics as a site for the production of a revolutionary citizenship during the 1950s and 60s. Gordon posits his work as looking, "at the meaning of the Nasser era to Egyptians who lived - and remember - it", (NOTE:  Joel Gordon, Revolutionary Melodrama: Popular Film and Civic Identity in Nasser’s Egypt. (Chicago UP: 2002) 9.) and my work builds upon Gordon's efforts to trace this construction of a revolutionary ethos in Egyptian media. (NOTE:  In fact, Gordon poses a number of similar questions, including " To what extent did the Nasser regime succeed in propagating a revolutionary ethos? … How did popular culture reflect the abolition of formal class lines, expanded educational opportunity, women’s suffrage, Arab socialism, independence? How was religion or religious expression manifested in a civic culture that was avowedly secular?” Revolutionary Melodrama, 10. However, Our studies diverge though around the question of whether popular culture reflects popular belief.) Gordon's earlier work on the Officer's Revolution is also useful for understanding the contingency of the revolution and how the lessons of 1952 continued to reverberate for the remainder of the Nasser era. (NOTE:  Joel Gordon, Nasser’s Blessed Movement: Egypt’s Free Officers and the July Revolution. (Oxford UP, 1992).) More recently, Gordon published a biography of Nasser, and shared an unpublished paper on the cultures of neutrality in Nasserist Egypt. (NOTE:  Joel Gordon, Nasser: Hero of the Arab Nation (Oneworld Publications, 2006) and “Cultures of Neutrality - Nasserism and its Discontents” Working Paper 2008 http://cavern.uark.edu/rd\_arsc/mest/Cultures\_of\_Neutrality.pdf) Both works focus more directly on the international and nonaligned aspects of Nasserism, though both only hint at the broader scope my dissertation explores. Nonetheless, Gordon's work is helpful for validating my assertion about the breadth of the UAR's aspirations and the influence of media in the early postcolonial moment. (NOTE:  For example see, Gordon, Nasser: Hero of the Arab Nation.  Gordon writes, "In a global context, Nasser and Nasser's Egypt are best studied in the context of Nehru's India, Sukarno's Indonesia, Nkrumah's Ghana, Tito's Yugoslavia, (as well as Ho Chi Minh's Vietnam and Castro's Cuba): fellow leaders with whom the Egyptian ruler rubbed shoulders and with whom he forcefully advocated international recognition of the concerns and agendas of new states. In the Arab world, Nasser had many rivals but few peers." 4.)

Since the late 1990s, historians have increasingly examined the narratives, meanings, and memories surrounding Nasser and Nasserism - the term for the mix of ideology and personality cult that emerged during his regime. This shift has spawned a number of biographies of Nasser, and reinvigorated studies of pan-Arabism. (NOTE:  Peter Woodward, Nasser. (London: Longman, 1992); Anne Alexander, Nasser: His Life and Times. (Cairo: American University in Cairo Press, 2005); Laura M. James, Nasser at War: Arab Images of the Enemy. (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006); Adeed Dawisha, Arab Nationalism in the Twentieth Century: From Triumph to Despair. (Princeton: Princeton UP, 2003); James P. Jankowski, Nasser’s Egypt, Arab Nationalism, and the United Arab Republic. (Boulder, CO: Lynne Ripener Publishers, 2001); Elie Podeh, The Decline of Arab Unity: The Rise and Fall of United Arab Republic. (Portland, OR: Sussex Academic Press, 1999).) Noteworthy is Rami Ginat's *Syria and the Doctrine of Arab Neutralism*, which explores the longer intellectual history of neutralism in the Arab world, as well as the intellectual underpinnings of the union between Egypt and Syria from 1958 to 1961. Ginat approaches these topics from a similar framework to my dissertation, focusing on press and government narratives to study discourses around neutralism, especially from the Syrian perspective. (NOTE:  Ginat also has an article on the longer intellectual origins of neutralism in Egypt. "The Egyptian Left and the Roots of Neutralism in the Pre-Nasserite Era" British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies, Vol. 30, No. 1 (May, 2003) 5-24.) However, without the digital tools I use, his study relies on a more limited scope of sources. The question of the origins of neutralism in Egypt is also the subject of Reem Abou-el-Fadl's recent article on the Free Officer's early policy formation. Fadl argues that previous scholarship has largely dismissed the impact of the colonial experience on Nasser and his compatriots, and how this legacy was central to their support for neutralism and pan-Arabism. (NOTE:  Reem Abou-el-Fadl, “Early Pan-Arabism in Egypt’s July Revolution: the Free Officer’s Political Formation and Policy-Making, 1946-54” Nations and Nationalism. 21. 2. 2015. 289-308.) My work builds on Ginat and Fadl's studies by extending their work into the 1960s, and integrating a more global approach to these questions. 

Two works that do explore these questions into the 1960s is Gerasimos Tsourapas' "Nasser’s Educators and Agitators across al-Watan al-‘Arabi: Tracing the Foreign Policy Importance of Egyptian Regional Migration, 1952-1967", and Laurie Brand's *Official Stories: Politics and National Narratives in Egypt and Algeria. *Tsourapas' article explores how efforts to send Egyptian professionals, and specifically teachers, were part of a larger Egyptian policy to cement regional solidarities. Tsourapas focuses primarily on the Arab region and on the question of migration policy, but his article is useful for understanding alternative tools of Egyptian foreign policy in this era. Similar to Tsourapas, Brand uses educational textbooks, as well as other official documents, to explore the creation of an official narrative in the UAR. This emphasis on narrative is also similar to Ginat’s work, but Brand compares the Egyptian experience to Algeria, rather than exploring the discourses in Egypt and Syria. All of these works are foundational for my approach of focusing on print materials to explore discourses, but my project utilizes both a more refined methodology and broader corpus to answer these questions.

In addition to the scholarly interest in Nasser and his policies, historians have long studied Egypt's relations to the global superpowers, especially the United States and the United Kingdom, and to a lesser degree the Soviet Union. (NOTE:  Rami Ginat, The Soviet Union and Egypt, 1945-1955. (London: Frank Cass, 1993); Ray Takeyh, The Origins of the Eisenhower Doctrine: The US, Britain, and Nasser’s Egypt 1953-57. (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2000); Salim Yaqub, Containing Arab Nationalism: The Eisenhower Doctrine and the Middle East. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004); Robert McNamara, Britain, Nasser and the Balance of Power in the Middle East, 1952-1967: From the Egyptian Revolution to the Six-Day War. (Portland, OR: Frank Cass, 2003); Jon B. Alterman, Egypt and American Foreign Assistance, 1952-1956: Hopes Dashed. (New York: Palgrave. 2002); Nigel John Ashton, Eisenhower, Macmillan, and the Problem of Nasser: Anglo-American Relations and Arab Nationalism, 1955-59. (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1996); Silvia Borzutzky and David Berger. "Damned if You Do, Damned if You Don’t: The Eisenhower Administration and the Aswan Dam." The Middle East Journal. 64. 1 (2010) 84-102.) Many of these works have focused on two of the key crises of the Nasser period - the Suez Crisis and the Six Days War. (NOTE:  William Roger Louis and Avi Shlaim. The 1967 Arab-Israeli War: Origins and Consequences. (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2012); Keith Kyle, Suez: Britain’s End of Empire in the Middle East. (London: I.B. Taurus, 2003).) However, these studies have primarily explored questions around the decline of the British Empire and the rise of American power in the Middle East, as well as Egypt's relationship with Israel and Arab states. (NOTE:  Zach Levey and Elie Podeh. Britain and the Middle East: from Imperial Power to Junior Partner. (Portland, Or: Sussex Academic Press, 2008); Empire and Revolution: The United States and the Third World Since 1945. Ed. by Peter L. Hahn and Mary Ann Heiss. (Columbus, OH: Ohio State UP, 2001); Lloyd C. Gardner, The Road to Tahrir Square: Egypt and the United States from the Rise of Nasser to the Fall of Mubarak. (New York, NY: New Press. 2011); Douglas Little, American Orientalism: The United States and the Middle East since 1945. (Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina, 2004) and “The New Frontier on the Nile: JFK, Nasser, and Arab Nationalism.” The Journal of American History. 75. 2 (Sep., 1988), 501-527; Melani McAlister, Epic Encounters: Culture, Media, and U.S. Interests in the Middle East Since 1945. (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2005).) Recently, Jesse Ferris' *Nasser's Gamble: How Intervention in Yemen Caused the Six-Day War and the Decline of Egyptian Power* and Guy Laron's *Origins of the Suez crisis: Postwar Development Diplomacy and the Struggle over Third World Industrialization, 1945-1956 *have re-examined these conflicts from a more international perspective. Laron's recent articles on the 1955 Czech arms deal in Egypt, Soviet policy in the late 1960s towards the UAR, and the role of economics in Third World solidarities have also been useful in elucidating the debates over industrialization and development during this era. (NOTE:  Guy Laron, “Stepping Back from the Third World: Soviet Policy toward the United Arab Republic, 1965–1967.” Journal of Cold War Studies, 12. 4, Fall 2010. 99-118; Guy Laron, “Semi-Peripheral Countries and the Invention of the ‘Third World’, 1955–65”, Third World Quarterly, 35:9, (2014) 1547-1565; Guy Laron, “Cutting the Gordian Knot: the Post-WWII Egyptian Quest for Arms and the 1955 Czechoslovak Arms Deal” Cold War International History Project. 55. 2007)  Laron's work somewhat overlaps with my project, since he also explores Egypt's role in nonalignment and Afro-Asianism, but I believe our approaches are more complementary since I focus primarily on narrative and ideas, whereas Laron focuses on economics and international trade. 

A further difference between my study and Laron’s is my emphasis on Cairo’s media. Egypt more so than most Arab countries has received significant attention to its media production, but these studies have often focused on the digital era of the 1990s, utilized news as a source but not a historical object, or ignored the institutional histories of media. One model for my research is Ziad Fahmy’s article “Media-Capitalism: Colloquial Mass Culture and Nationalism in Egypt, 1908-18” explores the earlier antecedents of Egypt’s media infrastructure.  Fahmy's work in particular has been useful because of his conception of ‘media-capitalism’, a term he coins to discuss the larger production and economies of print, audio, and visual media in Egypt at the turn of the twentieth-century, and one I hope to include in my analyses of media production in Cairo. Fahmy’s study also builds on earlier histories, like Lila Abu-Lughod and Joel Gordon’s work on the use of television and film as mass media to build new political subjectivities in Egypt. The intersection between politics and media is during the Nasser regime has been well tread by scholars, with William Rugh’s *Arab Mass Media: Newspapers, Radio, and Television in Arab Politics* being particularly foundational for studies of politics and media infrastructure in the Arab world. Building upon Rugh's work, Laura M. James, whose work I discussed earlier, has been especially useful for understanding the shifting political winds that influenced media and press policies during the Free Officers' regime. Though James is attentive to censorship, her accounts and that of Charles Tripp in an essay in *Contemporary Egypt: Through Egyptian Eyes* about the degree and mechanisms of government control of the press differ. This gap is in part due to differing source bases and oral histories, but also speaks to the difficulty in understanding the underlying mechanisms of the media and the press in Cairo during this period. 

In part, the question of relationship between state and media is one part of a larger structural debate if the field of Arab media studies on how to approach the history of Arab media. Two of the foremost scholars in this field are Walter Armbrust and Tarik Sabry. In *Cultural Encounters in the Arab World*, Sabry outlines much of the central dilemma for media theorists of the Arab world - understanding Arab media not solely the byproduct of a Western model, but rather the result of entanglements between differing conceptions of modern, modernity, modernization, and moderness. This emphasis on the 'modern' in media is also central to Walter Armbrust’s chapter on History in Arab Media Studies from the anthology *Arab Cultural Studies*. Both studies argue against Eurocentric version of modernity and highlight the specific periodization of media development in the Arab World. Armbrust also calls for a more historical approach to media studies of the Middle East, which has a tendency to homogenize audiences.  Armbrust outlines areas for future scholarship, and my work in particular heeds his call for attention to the relationship between media and colonialism, the connections between high and colloquial version of Arabic in Egyptian media and conceptions about the Egyptian nation, and the overlap between various types of media from visual to audio that were part of imagining this new Egyptian modernity.  

One area that is central to my dissertation and builds on Armbrust's clarion call is my inclusion of Radio Cairo. Though accessing the original radio broadcasts is impossible, I do have many of the BBC summaries to draw upon. Furthermore, Laura M. James also has an article on the impact of these radio broadcasts in the Arab world and their influence on fomenting political change and aggravating regional and global powers. Similar to her book, James does not fully explore the more international dimensions though James M. Brennan does have a chapter and article that explores the impact of Radio Cairo in East Africa. Both these studies as well as a few other help expand both my conception of media and the geographic range of my study. Laura Bier's work on feminism and women's activism in the Nasser era also explores some aspects of the Afro-Asian and nonaligned dimensions in Cairo, especially around the Afro-Asian Women's Conference in 1961. (NOTE:  Laura Bier, Revolutionary Womanhood: Feminisms, Modernity, and the State in Nasser's Egypt. (Palo Alto, CA, USA: Stanford University Press, 2011).) The Afro-Asian Writer's Conference in Cairo in 1962 is also featured in Vijay Prashad's *The Darker Nations.* (NOTE:  Vijay Prashad, The Darker Nations: A People’s History of the Third World. (New York, NY: New Press, 2007).)  These works are part of a fairly small literature on Afro-Asianism and the Bandung moment that in the recent years has started to grow with a renewed interest in decolonization. (NOTE:  Kweku Ampiah, The Political and Moral Imperatives of the Bandung Conference of 1955: The Reactions of the US, UK, and Japan. (Poole, England: Global Oriental, 2007); Jacqueline Anne Braveboy-Wagner, Institutions of the Global South. (New York, NY: Routledge, 2009); The Idea of Freedom in Asia and Africa. Ed. by Robert H. Taylor. (Stanford, CA: Stanford UP, 2002); Christopher J. Lee, Making a World after Empire: The Bandung Moment and Its Political Afterlives. (Athens, OH: Ohio UP, 2010).  David Kimche, The Afro-Asian Movement: Ideology and Foreign Policy of the Third World. (New York: Halsted Press, 1973); Martin Shipway, Decolonization and its Impact: A Comparative Approach to the End of the Colonial Empires. (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2008); The United States and Decolonization: Power and Freedom. Ed. by David Ryan and Victor Pungong. (New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press, 2000); Jamie Mackie, Bandung 1955: Non-alignment and Afro-Asian Solidarity (Singapore: Select Books, 2005).) 

Matthew Connelly's pioneering work *Diplomatic Revolution: Algeria's Fight for Independence and the Origins of the Post-Cold War* highlighted the need and potential for Cold War histories with a more in-depth consideration of decolonization and the emergence of a Third World.  (NOTE:  Mathew Connelly, Diplomatic Revolution: Algeria's Fight for Independence and the Origins of the Post-Cold War Era. (Oxford, UK: Oxford UP, 2002); Mathew Connelly, "Rethinking the Cold War and Decolonization: The Grand Strategy of the Algerian War for Independence." International Journal of Middle East Studies. 33. 2 (May, 2001) 221-245; Mathew Connelly, “Taking Off the Cold War Lens: Visions of North-South Conflict during the Algerian War for Independence.” The American Historical Review. 105. 3. (June 2000) 739-769.) In the last fifteen years, numerous scholars have explored this intersection, though studying this phenomenon at a global level remains difficult for one scholar. One solution has been the creation of anthologies, such as *The Cold War in the Third World *and *The Regional Cold Wars in Europe, East Asia, and the Middle East, *which\* \*have brought together scholars working on a variety of regional specialties to explore this larger dynamic. (NOTE:  The Cold War in the Third World. Edited by Robert J. McMahon. (New York, NY: Oxford UP, 2013) and The Regional Cold Wars in Europe, East Asia, and the Middle East: Crucial Periods and Turning Points. Ed. Lorenz M. Luthi. (Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2015); The Middle East and the Cold War: Between Security and Development. Ed. by Massimiliano Trentin. (Newcastle, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2012).) This greater attention to decolonization has also sparked new studies on the role of China in the Third World, and I plan to use this research, as well as work on the Soviet Union's activities in my project since I lack the requisite linguistic skills to work directly in these materials, and access to archives in these countries is increasingly being denied to foreign researchers. (NOTE:  Jeremy Friedman, “Soviet Policy in the Developing World and the Chinese Challenge in the 1960s.” Cold War History. 10. 2 (2010) 247-272; Zhihua Shen and Yafeng Xia, “The Whirlwind of China: Zhou Enlai's Shuttle Diplomacy in 1957 and its Effects.” Cold War History. 10. 4 (2010) 513-535; Lorenz M. Luthi, The Sino-Soviet split: Cold War in the Communist World (Princeton: Princeton UP, 2008); Jian Chen, “Bridging Revolution and Decolonization: The Bandung Discourse in China’s Early Cold War Experience” Chinese Historical Review. 15. no 2. 2008; Jian Chen, Mao’s China and the Cold War. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001); Kyle Haddad-Fonda, “An illusory alliance: revolutionary legitimacy and Sino-Algerian relations, 1958–1962”, The Journal of North African Studies, 19:3, (2014) 338-357; Guy Laron, “Stepping Back from the Third World: Soviet Policy toward the United Arab Republic, 1965–1967.” Journal of Cold War Studies, 12. 4, Fall 2010. 99-118.) 

Recently scholars have started to re-explore North African history through this lens, building upon Connelly's earlier insights. In particular, I have already mentioned how Jeffrey Byrne's recent book *Mecca of Revolution *is a model for my project. In the book, Byrne explores many of the similar questions I raised in my introduction, specifically around the multiple meanings of Third World. Byrne also elucidates much of the history of the Algerian FLN in Cairo, and the relationship between Nasser and Ahmed Ben Bella, which are important pieces of my story. In his article on efforts to build a nonaligned coalition in Algiers and Belgrade, Byrne argues that the lofty rhetoric of Third Worldism often obscured the pragmatic and actual efforts to construct foreign policies, which is a dynamic at the heart of my dissertation. (NOTE:  Jeffrey James Byrne, "Beyond Continents, Colours, and the Cold War: Yugoslavia, Algeria, and the Struggle for Non-Alignment", The International History Review (2015); Jeffrey James Byrne, “Our Own Special Brand of Socialism: Algeria and the Contest of Modernities in the 1960s.” Diplomatic History. 33. 3 (June 2009) 427-447.) In addition to Byrne's work, David Stenner's recent article "‘Bitterness towards Egypt’ – the Moroccan Nationalist Movement, Revolutionary Cairo and the Limits of Anti-Colonial Solidarity" illuminates how the Moroccan independence movement struggled with Nasser's efforts to assert his leadership over revolutionary movements, which he argues ultimately led to a schism in the Arab world. (NOTE:  David Stenner “‘Bitterness towards Egypt’ – the Moroccan Nationalist Movement, Revolutionary Cairo and the Limits of Anti-Colonial Solidarity”, Cold War History (2015).) This alternative perspective on Cairo's role in anti-colonialism is also explored briefly in recent works from the field of US in the World. Philip Muehlenbeck and Robert Rakove have been among the first to look at the United States’ response to Nasser in relation to the broader question of US policy towards African decolonization and nonalignment respectively. (NOTE:  David D. Newsom, The Imperial Mantle: The United States, Decolonization, and the Third World. 
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana UP, 2001); Philip E. Muehlenbeck, Betting on the Africans: John F. Kennedy’s Courting of African Nationalist Leaders. (Oxford, UK: Oxford UP, 2012); Race, Ethnicity, and the Cold War: A Global Perspective. Edited by Philip E. Muehlenbeck. (Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt UP, 2012); Robert B. Rakove, Kennedy, Johnson, and the Nonaligned World. (New York, NY: Cambridge UP, 2012); Jason Parker, “Cold War II: The Eisenhower Administration, the Bandung Conference, and the Postwar Era.” Diplomatic History. 30. 5. (November 2006) 867-892; Eric Gettig, “Trouble Ahead in Afro-Asia”: The United States, the Second Bandung Conference, and the Struggle for the Third World, 1964–1965,” Diplomatic History. 39. 1. (2015) 126-156.) Rakove has also explored the question of Non-Aligned Movement summitry, and specifically the non-aligned policy of mediation. In this article, Rakove argues that the late 1950s and 60s, non-aligned states, like the UAR, sought to pursue a policy of mediation with the Cold War superpowers over conflicts in the Congo and South East Asia. Though partially driven out of self interest, Rakove details how these states were primarily motivated by “conceptions of ideals and identity: the notion that the post-colonial world could act with an energy, morality, and creativity lost to the industrial North.” (NOTE:  Robert Rakove, “The Rise and Fall of Non-Aligned Mediation, 1961-1966” The International History Review, 37. 5. (2015) 19.) However, Rakove details how mediation’s success at lessening Cold War tensions, unexpectedly also limited the policy’s impact and that the shift towards more militant means in places like Vietnam and Rhodesia further splintered this ethos. Rakove also discusses the 1964 Non-Aligned Conference in Cairo, and Nasser’s efforts to present the conference as a milestone for the movement, even as the renewed civil war in the Congo overshadowed the conference. (NOTE:  Janick Marina Schaufelbuehl, Sandra Bott, Jussi Hanhimäki & Marco Wyss “Non-Alignment, the Third Force, or Fence-Sitting: Independent Pathways in the Cold War”, The International History Review (2015).) My project draws on much of the insights of Rakove’s work, and combines them with a consideration of the other threads of anti-colonialism in Cairo. The broader perspective of these US in the World studies also highlights Nasser's role in African affairs, which has largely fallen to the wayside in the Egyptian historiography and histories of pan-Africanism. 

Even though the UAR does not feature prominently, I also examine the literature on modern African international relations, which highlight some of the alternative efforts at constructing regional and continental unity that at times challenged the version propagated in Cairo. (NOTE:  Frederick Cooper, Africa Since 1940: The Past of the Present. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge UP, 2002); Frederick Cooper, Decolonization and African Society: The Labor Question in French and British Africa. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge UP, 1996); Howard W. French, A Continent for the Taking: The Tragedy and Hope of Africa. (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2004); Daniel Speich, "The Kenyan Style of “African Socialism": Developmental Knowledge Claims and the Explanatory Limits of the Cold War.” Diplomatic History. 33. 3 (June 2009) 449-466; Kwesi Krafona, The Pan-African Movement: Ghana’s Contribution. (London, UK: Afroworld Pub.1986); Colin Legum, Africa Since Independence. (Bloomington, IN: Indiana UP, 1999); Elizabeth Schmidt, Foreign Intervention in Africa. (West Nyack, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2013); Jeffrey S. Ahlman, “The Algerian Question in Nkrumah's Ghana, 1958–1960: Debating “Violence” and “Nonviolence” in African Decolonization,” Africa Today. 57. 2 (Winter 2010) 66-84.) Furthermore, this literature hints at how racial and religious differences were barriers to the UAR's efforts to bridge the Sahara. (NOTE:  Ryan M. Irwin, Gordian Knot: Apartheid and the Unmaking of the Liberal World Order. (New York: Oxford UP, 2012); Ryan M. Irwin, “Mapping Race: Historicizing the History of the Color-Line. History Compass. 8/9 (2010) 
984-999.) For example, Zach Levey's work on Israel's development efforts in decolonizing African states underscores the difficulty the UAR faced in trying to build continental solidarities, and how this anti-colonial solidarity was not inevitable. (NOTE:  Zach Levey, Israel in Africa 1956-1976. (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Republic of Letters Pub., 2012); Zach Levey, “The Rise and Decline of a Special Relationships: Israel and Ghana, 1957-1966.” African Studies Review. 46. 1 (Apr. 2003) 155-177.) I also utilize the literature on the Congo crisis, which in the last few years has grown considerably as historians have unearthed the larger global implications of the crisis. These works mention Nasser and Cairo but fail to explore much of the UAR’s efforts or how the city became a key hub for Congolese rebels. (NOTE:  Larry Devlin, Chief of Station, Congo. A Memoir of 1960-67. (New York, NY 2007); Lise A. Namikas, Battleground Africa: Cold War in the Congo, 1960-1965. (Stanford, CA: Stanford UP,  2013); John Kent, America, the UN and Decolonisation: Cold War conflict in the Congo. (New York, NY:  Routledge Press. 2010); Alessandro Iandolo,  “Imbalance of Power: The Soviet Union and the Congo Crisis, 1960– 1961.”Journal of Cold War Studies, 16. 2, Spring 2014, 32-55.) The Congo crisis also opens a window into the UAR's relationship with Cuba, and the UAR's response to Cuba's efforts at establishing tricontentialism. (NOTE:  Lillian Guerra, Visions of Power in Cuba: Revolution, Redemption, and Resistance, 1959- 1971. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2012); Piero Gleijeses, Conflicting Missions Havana Washington and Africa, 1959-1976. (Chapel Hill, NC 2002).) Lastly, the literature on Sub-Saharan African decolonization also illuminates the role of African Americans in these movements. A growing subfield of the US in the World literature examines African Americans during the Cold War, and how efforts for African decolonization were intertwined with efforts to achieve civil rights. (NOTE:  Brenda Gayle Plummer, In Search of Power: African Americans in the Era of Decolonization, 1956-1974. (Cambridge, England: Cambridge UP, 2013); Kevin Kelly Gaines, American Africans in Ghana: Black Expatriates and the Civil Rights Era. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 2006).)  While most of these works focus on sub-Saharan Africa or the Black Atlantic, my dissertation explores the experiences of some of these African Americans, such as Shirley Graham Du Bois and Maya Angelou, who spent time in Cairo during the 1960s. (NOTE:  Horne, Gerald. Race Woman: The Lives of Shirley Graham Du Bois. (New York, NY: New York UP, 2000).) While American missionaries, embassy officials, and development experts were in the city during this decade, many of the African Americans who advocated for African liberation also participated in the UAR's anti-colonial vision through conferences and government owned newspapers and periodicals, and provided a bridge to both sub-Saharan Africa and communities in the United States. 

Historians have increasingly explored the extent of African Americans travels across the Third World, but few scholars have focused on individuals in Cairo. One exception is David Graham Du Bois, the son of Shirley Graham Du Bois, who spent most of the 1960s in Cairo, and features prominently on two works on the historical connections between Palestinians and African Americans. (NOTE:  Alex Lubin, Geographies of Liberation: The Making of an Afro-Arab Political Imaginary. (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 2014); Keith P. Feldman, Shadow over Palestine: The Imperial Life of Race in America. (Minneapolis, MN, USA: University of Minnesota Press, 2014).) After arriving from Peking in 1960, Du Bois found Cairo to be a revolutionary hub, and was able to find work as a writer for *The Egyptian Gazette *and *Arab Observer*, as well as on Radio Cairo. After the coup in Ghana in 1966, Shirley joined David in Cairo, and also promoted Nasser and the UAR to her networks. In the article "Towards an Afro-Arab Diasporic Culture: The Translational Practices of David Graham Du Bois," Keith Feldman does a close reading of Du Bois’ semi-autobiographical work *And Bid Him Sing…, *which loosely described his time in Cairo, and the aspirations and struggles for non-Egyptians in the city. Du Bois was also central during Malcolm X’s visit to Cairo in 1964, which is the subject of Edward E. Curtis’ recent article “My Heart Is in Cairo”: Malcolm X, the Arab Cold War, and the Making of Islamic Liberation Ethics”. Curtis explores for the first time the importance of Cairo, Nasser, and al Azhar to Malcolm X’s development of a new Islamic ethics of liberation towards the end of his life. While Manning Marable’s earlier biography of Malcolm X discussed his time in Saudi Arabia and Egypt, Curtis explores much more in depth how the revolutionary ethos of Cairo inspired Malcolm X’s efforts to establish the Organization of African American Unity and propagate a new understanding of the connection between Islam and nonaligned politics. (NOTE:  This article builds upon Sales, William W. Jr. From Civil Rights to Black Liberation: Malcolm X and the Organization of Afro-American Unity. (Boston, MA: South End Press, 1994) focusing on Malcolm X’s time in Cairo.) While both Du Bois and Malcolm X were exceptional individuals, their experiences in Cairo provide an alternative lens into this anti-colonial vision than the records of foreign embassies. 

Besides Curtis’ work, most historians have ignored the Islamic aspects of the Nasser regime. This neglect is in part due to the focus on the Muslim Brotherhood during this period, which was outlawed and its leaders, like Sayyid Qutb, were executed. Furthermore, the subsequent rise of political Islam during the Sadat period has largely overshadowed the role of pan-Islamic ideas in Nasser’s anti-colonial vision. One of the few books on this period is Jakob Skovgaard-Petersen’s *Defining Islam for the Egyptian State: Muftis and Fatwas of the Dār al-Iftā*, which examines the crucial reforms of 1961 that nationalized all Islamic institutions in Egypt, including al-Azhar, the seat of Islamic learning in Egypt. In these reforms, Nasser also established new ministries for Islamic charities and missionaries. (NOTE:  Jakob Skovgaard-Petersen expands on the impact of these changes in the 1970s in the chapter "Egypt's Ulama in the State, in Politics, and in the Islamist Vision" in The Rule of Law, Islam, and Constitutional Politics in Egypt and Iran. Eds. Said Amir Arjomand and Nathan J. Brown, (SUNY Press 2013). Also see Malika Zeghal, "Religion and Politics in Egypt: The Ulema of al-Azhar, Radical Islam, and the State (1952-94)," International Journal of Middle East Studies, Vol. 31, No. 3 (Aug., 1999) 371-399.) In my dissertation, I explore how the Nasser government leveraged these Islamic solidarities with other decolonizing states, and supported missionaries from across the continent to study at al-Azhar. I also consider efforts to establish some form of pan-Islamic institution during this era, which eventually materialized into the Organization of Islamic Conference in 1969. While the thread of pan-Islamic ideals was less overt in revolutionary discourses in Cairo, missionaries, Islamic thinkers and educators, and Islamic magazines were important vehicles for imaging these anti-colonial solidarities and spreading them to places like Nigeria and Indonesia. Ultimately, my dissertation attempts to cut across both racial and religious divisions that have shaped current historiographies on these topics, and highlight the intersections between all these seemingly disparate movements and ideas that crisscrossed through Cairo.

As I mentioned in the introduction, I utilize the lens of Cairo to frame my study. Cairo has been a subject of inquiry for numerous urban histories, though the Nasser era has only recently received detailed study. (NOTE:  Nezar AlSayyad, Cairo: Histories of a City. Cambridge, (MA: Harvard UP, 2011); Andre Raymond, Cairo. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 2000); Nancy Reynolds, A City Consumed: Urban Commerce, the Cairo Fire, and The Politics of Decolonization in Egypt. (Stanford, CA: Stanford UP, 2012); Andrew Beattie, Cairo: A Cultural History. (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2005).
) In the edited anthology *Cairo Cosmopolitan: Politics, Culture, and Urban Space in the New Globalized Middle East*, Omani el Shakry traces from the 1930s to the late 1970s the spatial practices around urbanism in/from Cairo, and argues that understanding this question requires examining the relationships between the city and the rural. In the chapter "Cairo as Capital of Socialist Revolution?", Shakry argues that state planners viewed Cairo as a model for revolutionary modernity, as opposed to the countryside which was a site for development projects. According to Shakry, efforts to remake the peasantry through social welfare development projects and land redistribution were in fact designed to regulate these populations. Shakry’s insights build upon the groundbreaking work of Timothy Mitchell on the emergence of ‘techno-politics’ and the expertise of development during the Nasser period. In *The Rule of Experts, *Mitchell explores the construction of an ‘economy’ in twentieth century Egypt, exploring the intersections of science, politics, and technologies and how experts tried to make these entities legible. Mitchell describes how during the Nasser era, Egyptian and American development experts attempted to transform the peasantry away from feudalism towards a more socialist and modernized model of property and labor. Both Shakry and Mitchell’s works explore not only the longer histories of these practices and ideas, but also how these experts often failed to achieve their aims or even understand the communities involved in these projects. While this assessment is true for many modernizing schemes, this insight is particularly important for understanding both the scale of the Nasser’s government’s development plans, as well as the disconnect that developed between the ideas and realities about the future of modern Egypt. 

Most recently, the organizer behind the e-zine *Cairo Observer*, Mohamed Elshahed defended his dissertation, which builds upon Shakry and Mitchell’s research, while also exploring in depth the role of architecture and spatial planning during the Nasserist period. In "Revolutionary Modernism? Architecture and the Politics of Transition", Elshahed explores how architectural modernism emerged in late colonial Egypt, and became tied to the revolutionary and anti-colonial struggles over national identity in the 1950s and 60s. Elshahed traces how urban spaces, from housing to schools to major landmarks like the Cairo Tower, were designed and built to embody this new revolutionary ethos, and represented the most visible symbols of the Nasser regime’s legitimacy. Elshahed explores how the construction of these new spaces was part of larger discourses in the media around the changing landscape of Egyptian politics and society. My dissertation and Elshahed’s research overlap considerably, as he also considers the anti-colonial and global aspects of Nasserism in this period. In fact, he writes about some of the international exhibitions, such as the Afro-Asian Housing Congress in Cairo in 1963, that I also cover in my research. However, though our questions and sources have much in common, Elshahed is more focused on the development and disappearance of a professionalized architectural expertise in Egypt, and how the rise and decline of this field was tied to a belief in revolutionary modernism throughout the Nasser regime. In essence, Elshahed, Shakry, and Mitchell’s scholarship all provide important pieces of how Egyptian experts beyond the top rungs of the government mediated, perpetuated, and legitimized this revolutionary agenda. My dissertation builds upon these works to explore the more global dimensions of this revolutionary vision, and how ideas around development projects, land and education reform, and architecture were also part of discourses about the UAR’s foreign policy, and Cairo’s place in this new anti-colonial and decolonized world. 

**Intellectual Framework**

Though historians traditionally eschew theory, I believe that a project like mine - that bridges multiple regions and scales - requires some discussion of how I plan to organize, and, perhaps more importantly, delimit the scope of this study. With the use of these digital tools and my extensive datasets, there is a temptation to indulge in mission creep, and essentially produce a panopticon of politics and society in Cairo. To avoid this fate and focus my study, I have developed an intellectual framework that leverages both theory and previous historical models. Thus, many of the historiographies I previously discussed provide both a foundation for content and a template for structuring my project. For example, I incorporate: the emphasis on narratives and memories in works on modern Egypt; the focus on global movements and international politics in the international histories of nonalignment and the Third World; and the construction of Cairo as a space from urban histories. (NOTE:  Scott, James C. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed. (New Haven, CT: Yale UP, 1998).) In addition to these works, my project also draws from the history of ideas, the new global intellectual history, and spatial history. As I discussed in my introduction, my two primary models are Michael Goebel’s *Anti-Imperial Metropolis* on Interwar Paris and Jeffrey Byrne’s *Mecca of Revolution* on Algeria, both of which are exemplary international histories of space and movements. In terms of histories of ideas, this project draws from Daniel Rodger’s *Age of Fracture, *Erez Manela’s *The Wilsonian Moment: Self-Determination and the International Origins of Anticolonial Nationalism*, and Mark Mazower’s *Governing the World: The History of an Idea*. I push Rodger’s insightful argument about the fragmenting of identities and solidarities in America during the late 70s and 80s to the earlier Egyptian context to understand the fracturing of these anti-colonial solidarities and identities. Both Manela and Mazower’s books offer models for understanding how political imaginings travel across borders and help construct international movements. Manela and Mazower’s works also exemplify the new trend in intellectual history to explore questions from a global perspective. (NOTE:  Sebastian Conrad, What Is Global History? (Princeton, US: Princeton University Press, 2016); Diego Adrian Olstein. Thinking History Globally. (Hampshire: Palsgrave Macmillan, 2014).) This global approach builds upon the work of historians of international relations and empire, who have long emphasized the analytical category of ‘power’ as a subject for historical inquiry, especially the ways power encourages and halts certain flows of ideas and people across networks. (NOTE:  For overview, see Paul Kramer, "Power and Connection: Imperial Histories of the United States in the World," American Historical Review (December 2011) 1348-1391.)  For my project, Frederick Cooper’s definition of discourses as “coercive power” is critical, as well as his argument that discursive power can constitute and frustrate certain power formations. (NOTE:  Cooper, Frederick, Decolonization and African Society: The Labor Question in French and British Africa (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge UP, 1996) 15.) Thus, considering both ideas, discourses, and power is central to my framework, and helps elucidate both the aspirations and limitations of Cairo’s anti-colonial vision. 

My project also relies on many of the insights of Science Studies, especially research into how ideas are constructed and travel across networks. (NOTE:  For example, see Howlett, Peter and Mary S. Morgan, How Well Do Facts Travel? The Dissemination of Reliable Knowledge (2011).) These works touch on an important piece of my project - networks. Social network analysis and social movement theory both provide useful foundations for tracing these anti-colonial networks. However, my method diverges slightly from traditional social networks, since instead of tracing these networks from place to place, I trace the networks within Cairo and focus on their intersections in this space. Thus, I bridge social movement and network studies with the growing field of spatial history. As I mentioned previously, urban historians have long studied Cairo, and many of these works employ some degree of a ‘spatial’ framework. However, spatial history as a distinct field has grown exponentially since the advent of the ‘spatial turn’ with Henri Lefebvre’s *The Production of Space. *Part of this spatial turn\* \*is also the result of new mapping technologies, which have enabled synthesizing and visualizing large amounts of historical information. Geographers, sociologists, and anthropologists have long used these tools, such as Geographic Imaging Systems (GIS), and now historians interested in the spatial turn are using these same programs to map how people have interacted with spaces over time, (NOTE:  For more in depth discussion see Ian N. Gregory and Alistair Geddes, Toward Spatial Humanities: Historical GIS and Spatial History. (Indiana UP, 2014).) essentially analyzing and visualization of large historical datasets. (NOTE:  For example see Cameron Blevins, Geography of the Post http://cameronblevins.org/gotp/ and Digital Scholarship Lab University of Richmond, American Panorama Project https://dsl.richmond.edu/panorama/.) Most of these projects cover large geographic spaces or time periods, yet I believe that some of these methods can also be used for a more limited scope, such as the 1950s and 60s in Cairo. In fact, I believe that using both spatial theory and these new tools will help identify the parts of Cairo that were most actively involved in this anti-colonial vision, as well as how the Egyptian print media constructed a global anti-colonial geography around Cairo.

Analyzing complex historical data and extracting patterns is not easy, but there are successful models. One in particular is Cameron Blevins’ work on mapping the production of space in late nineteenth century Houston newspapers. In an article and companion methods piece, Blevins outlines how he mapped the construction and production of space in two daily newspapers, quantifying where and which places appeared in the newspaper and how these place names were part of envisioning new regional and national spaces. Blevins utilizes Franco Moretti’s method of ‘distant reading’, which uses large datasets to extract patterns about literature. Blevins employs distant reading to study how the newspaper discussed place, and argues that collectively all the articles and advertisements were part of imaging new regional spaces. Blevins’ work is a model both for his compelling argument, and because he outlines his method. Blevins first transforms the newspapers into a machine readable format, and then uses a combination of frequency analysis and content sampling to extract both the amount of place names and where in the newspaper each place was mentioned - whether in advertisements or the front page, etc…. Blevins explicitly states that the method is far from perfect with the data often producing errors. Nonetheless, he is able to explore these larger patterns within the newspapers, and then blend this meta-analysis with a more traditional narrative and close reading approach. Essentially, Blevins turns the traditional historical approach of closely reading a text and then extrapolating its importance on its head, using distant reading to first extrapolate the patterns and then closely reading certain articles to understand particular moments. Ultimately, Blevins persuasively uses this method to argue that regional conceptions of space trumped national ones, even though this period is traditionally thought of as one of national consolidation. 

This digital/computational method for exploring places can also be applied to ideas, or more specifically clusters of words that represent ideas and discourses. (NOTE:  For more, see Geoffrey Rockwell and Stefan Sinclair, Hermeneutica: Computer-Assisted Interpretation in the Humanities. (MIT Press, 2016); Shawn Graham, Ian Milligan, and Scott Weingart, Exploring Big Historical Data: The Historian’s Macroscope. (London: Imperial College Press, 2016) Historian’s Macroscope, Taylor Arnold and Lauren Tilton, Humanities Data in R: Exploring Networks, Geospatial Data, Images, and Text. (Cham: Springer, 2015). ) However, whether studying places or ideas, this method involves abstracting text, and there is a danger of misinterpreting these patterns and overstating their significance. Yet, even with this cautionary admission, I still believe that this approach provides a novel way of understanding my sources at a different scale, especially around the question of how discourses and meanings around ideas, places, and people change over time. One model of this method is Micki Kaufman’s Quantifying Kissinger project that explores the constellation of ideas in memcons and telcons from Kissinger’s time in the Nixon White House. Kaufman uses a number of corpus linguistic tools to explore how both the content and tone of these sources changed over time. I plan to use these same methods and tools to explore and compare Egyptian print media, government documents, and non-Egyptian print media envisioned Cairo’s role in anti-colonialism. 

Taken together, ideas, discourses, power, networks, and spaces, provide a robust analytical framework, which when combined with close and distant reading methods are the foundation for this study. Exploring the historiographical and intellectual background for this project is critical, even if it is a bit dry, because my dissertation is not one with obvious edges. Edges are the limits of a project that for historians usually involve choosing to focus on the life of one person or group. My project has limits (space: Cairo, time period: 1950s and 1960s) but the people and ideas involved are wide ranging. Thus, I believe that my intellectual framework can help focus my project productively, while also enabling me to draw on a diverse range of literatures and sources. Ultimately, my strongest rationale for using this framework is that the story of anti-colonial Cairo has remained on the margins, and this approach will help me uncover this elusive place in time. 

MEDIA STUDIES SECTION

Walter Armbrust

Joel Gordon

Lila Abu lughod

Laura James

Sreberny,!Annabelle.!!"The!Analytic!Challenges!of!Studying!the!Middle!East!and!its!Evolving!Media!Environment."!! Middle(East(Journal(of(Culture(and(Communication 1.1!(2008):!8\<23.

Sabry,!Tarik.!!"Arab!Media!and!Cultural!Studies:!Rehearsing!New!Questions."!!In!Kai!Hafez!(ed.),!Arab(Media:(Power(and( Weakness (New!York:!Continuum,!2008),!pp.!237\<51. Sabry,!Tarik.!!“Media!and!Cultural!Studies!in the!Arab!World:!Making!Bridges!to!Local!Discourses!of!Modernity.”!!In!Daya!K.! Thussu!(ed.),!Internationalizing(Media(Studies:(Impediments(and(Imperatives.!!New!York:!Routledge,!2009.!!196\< 213. Sabry,!Tarik.!!Cultural(Encounters(in(the(Arab(World:(On(Media,(the(Modern(and(the(Everyday.!!London:!I.B.!Tauris,!2010

Zayani,!Mohamed.!!"Arab!Media!Studies!between!the!Legacy!of!a!thin!Discipline!and!the!Promise!of!New!Cultural! Pathways."!!In!Tarik!Sabry!(ed.),!Arab(Cultural(Studies:(Mapping(the(Field (London:!IB!Tauris,!2011),!pp.!60\<85. Hallin,!Daniel!C.!and!Paolo!Manchini.!!“Comparing!Media!Systems.”!!In!James!Curran!and!Michael!Gurevitch!(eds.),!Mass( Media(and(Society (Hodder!Arnold),!pp.!215\<33. Wang,!Georgette!(ed.).!!DeGWesternizing(Communication(Research:(Altering(Questions(and(Changing(Frameworks (Routledge,!2013)

Ayish,!Muhammad.!!"Radio!Broadcasting!in!the!Arab!World."!!In!Noha!Mellor,!Muhammad!Ayish,!Nabil!Dajani!&!Khalil! Rinnawi!(eds),!Arab(Media(Globalization(and(Emerging(Media(Industries (Cambridge:!Polity,!2011),!pp.!67\<84. Boyd,!Douglas!A.!!“Development!of!Egypt’s!Radio:!Voice!of!the!Arab!under!Nasser.”!!Journalism(Quarterly, 52.4!(1975):! 645\<53. Suggested(further(Readings Laura!M.!James,!‘Whose!Voice?!Nasser,!the!Arabs!and!Sawt(Al(Arab’,!Transnational(Broadcasting(Studies 16!(2006),! .

Rugh,!William!A.!!"Arab!Information!Media:!Function!and!Structure."!!In!The(Arab(Press:(News(Media(and(Political( Process(in(the(Arab(World (Syracuse:!Syracuse!University!Press,!2004),!pp.!1\<27!(especially,!pp.!the!discussion! of!the!typology!of!the!Arab!Press,!pp.!22\<26). Mellor,!Noha.!!“An!Evaluation!of!Rugh’s!Typology.”!!In!The Making(of(Arab(News (Lanham:!Rowman!&!Littlefield:!2005),! pp.!49\<59

Abu\<Lughod,!Lila.!!Dramas(of(Nationhood:(The(Politics(of(Television(in(Egypt (Chicago:!University!of!Chicago!Press,!

2005).!!(Chapter!1:!"Ethnography!of!a!Nation",!pp.!3\<27)

Ziad Fahmy, "Media-Capitalism: Colloquial Mass Culture and Nationalism in Egypt, 1908? 18," International Journal of Middle East Studies 42, no. 01 (2010): 83-103.

PUBLIC DIPLOMACY SECTION
