**Sources**
Over the course of my archival research, I have amassed a number of primary sources, including Egyptian newspapers, magazines, and government publications, as well as dispatches from the American and British embassies in Cairo. In the coming weeks, I plan to finish collecting the full run of the Egyptian Gazette and Egyptian Mail, as well as a few more issues of Al-Ahram and Ruz al-Yusuf. I already have a few years of each of these newspapers, but having the full run would enable comparisons over the entire scope of the Nasser era. In addition to collecting these Egyptian newspapers, I am also currently collecting other nonaligned and Western newspapers. (NOTE: From Ghana, I am collecting The Ghanian Times and Voice of Africa, from India,  The Times of India, and from Algeria, L’echo d’Alger and el Moudjahid. These countries are the most obvious choices because of their global prominence in the nonaligned movement, and direct engagement with Nasser and the UAR.) Post-dissertation, I may also try to include newspapers from other nonaligned and Arab countries such as Cuba, Ethiopia, Lebanon, and Morocco. I also plan to include newspapers from the United States, Britain, and France. Ultimately with a study that leverages ‘big data’ tools there is always the allure of including additional sources. However, at the moment, I am focused on acquiring what I assess to be the requisite amount of source material to complete my dissertation, with the understanding that in the future I can continue to add other newspapers and government documents to my research.

**Chapter Outline**
My current dissertation organizational structure is to write an introduction and 5 chapters, organized around temporal periods and conceptual threads. My introduction, “Revolutionary Cairo: The Free Officers’, The Press, and The Search for a New World”, explores the period from the Free Officers’ Revolution to right before the Bandung Conference in 1954. In this introduction, I plan to lay out the central questions of my study: what was the idea of anti-colonialism over time, what were the ties between international events and internal politics in Cairo, and how did the relationship between the state and the media in Egypt mediate these other questions. This earlier period has already received significant scholarly attention, but I plan to include some discussion of this history since this moment was crucial for the Free Officers, who were experimenting with different policies and approaches to the press. The first chapter, “The Rise of Cairo: Intertwining Nationalization and Internationalism in Anti-Colonialism”,  explores the impact of the Bandung conference, the nationalization of the Suez Canal, and the beginning of global decolonization on Cairo’s conception of anti-colonialism, beginning in 1954 up until early 1960. In this chapter, I explore the emerging discourses around anti-colonialism and the uses of the media to legitimize the Nasser regime. I also explore how ideas of transnational political unions as the basis of anti-colonial solidarity started to take shape around the United Nations and in the form of the United Arab Republic. The main narrative in this chapter is centered around the question of how and when did the U.A.R. start promoting anti-colonialism in their media, and the connections between anti-colonial politics, international events, and internal politics. The second chapter, “All Roads Lead to Cairo: An Anti-Colonial Capital for the Third World”, focuses on the UAR’s efforts to promote Cairo as a hub for various anti-colonial movements and explores how the city became ascendant in international politics from early 1960 to the end of 1964. I trace how the growing media infrastructure around radio and print, as well as the quasi-nationalization of the press, were part and parcel of this anti-colonial political agenda. I also explore how Cairo hosted numerous conferences, exhibitions, and revolutionaries. The main question at the heart of this chapter was what was Cairo’s vision for global anti-colonialism and how was this vision propagated and received beyond the U.A.R. The third chapter, “City Under Siege: Cairo and The Struggles of Anti-Colonialism”, describes the UAR’s struggle to hold the anti-colonial internationalist coalition together with coups, the war in Yemen, and internal economic setbacks all combining to place strain on this coalition. From the breakdown of the Afro-Asian conference in 1964 to the Six Days War, this chapter explores the limits of anti-colonial solidarities and how the discourses around anti-colonialism were shifting towards more militant and radical language. In the face of a neocolonial resurgence across the globe, the UAR utilized the press and media infrastructure to circulate their alternative narrative of global events. However, this radical rhetoric and co-optation of the press came to a head with the Six Days War, when radio and newspapers reported victory in the face of a crushing defeat. This chapter focuses on the question of how did Cairo respond to the breakdown of the anti-colonial coalition and how were the discourses of anti-colonialism transformed in this political climate. The fourth chapter, “Cairo at Crossroads: Shifting Internal and International Politics”, takes up this history until Nasser’s death in 1970. The chapter explores how the aftermath of the Six Days War forced an evaluation of anti-colonial politics, Arab socialism, and the relationship of the government with the press. This chapter also traces the emergence of new leadership of the Third World from Nasser to figures like Muammar Gaddafi in Libya and Julius Nyerere in Tanzania. This chapter centers on the question of how were narratives about the U.A.R. and anti-colonialism shifting as the political community of anti-colonialism and the Third World shifted away from political cooperation and treaties towards armed struggle. The final chapter and conclusion, “Cairo First: A New Discourse of Independence and Internationalism”, ends on the early years of the Sadat regime until the Yom Kippur war of 1973. In this chapter, I connect Sadat’s efforts to create political unions with a variety of countries to the earlier anti-colonial moment, while also exploring how the rhetoric of anti-colonialism was repurposed to legitimize the Sadat regime. In particular, I highlight how discourses about Egypt and Cairo now privileged economic liberalization as part and parcel of the international order, which was a shift from the early Nasserist conception that emphasized political unions. Ultimately, this final chapter tries to contextualize the end of anti-colonial Cairo as both a product of global circumstances and local choices, weaving these final threads to understand the legacy of anti-colonialism on Cairo and the legacy of Cairo’s media on anti-colonialism. 

**Final Thoughts: Plans, Challenges, and Opportunities**
My estimated dissertation defense date is early 2018. I plan to continue collecting archival materials over the course of the next few weeks, and starting writing full immediately following the defense. In this prospectus, I have outlined my central research questions, their relevance and significance, the pertinent literatures and how my project fills an existing gap in our knowledge, and my intellectual and methodology frameworks. One area I have yet to broach is the challenges and opportunities for completing my dissertation. In this final section, I want to briefly sketch some of my concerns and ways I plan to address them.
The first hurdle for my dissertation is that in using primarily government funded print sources and government publications I may unintentionally reify the prescriptive history of the UAR’s government. If this project was looking at the longer legacies of the Nasser era, two of the most obvious ones would be the reliance on authoritarianism and the strength of the military in Egypt. While scholars continue to debate over whether Nasser and his compatriots ever intended to create a functioning democracy, the reality remains that many of the laws and policies pursued in this era undermined the independence of the press and the judiciary, which to this day is an on-going barrier to reform in Egypt. While my dissertation is largely about the construction of anti-colonialism in Cairo, the politics, projects, and laws that underpinned this anti-colonial ethos were also often aimed at marginalizing dissent and imprisoning political enemies. Similar to many historians of anti-colonialism, I have struggled with how to incorporate these realities within my narrative. My current solution is to rely on the observations of contemporary foreign observers and the secondary literature on this period, and highlight when possible the wider historical impact of this anti-colonial vision, which similar to many development schemes was well intentioned but, more often than not, destructive for many Egyptians. 
Tied to this challenge of addressing the full impact of the UAR’s anti-colonial vision is also the question of whether this project should focus principally on Cairo. When I originally conceived of this project, the emphasis on the city was based on the assumption of spending time in Cairo and finding more traditional archival sources like personal papers. While Cairo still helps root my study, using these new digital methods does provide the opportunity of studying these questions from a more global scale, rather than local one. However, relying on these new digital tools also pushes my study towards a more cultural analytics approach, than a historical one. While this method opens up new research avenues, this approach also raises questions about the framing of my project, and even more broadly what constitutes historical analysis. Ultimately, I believe that centering this project on Cairo remains useful since this method is still relatively experimental, and a more constrained hypothesis will help demonstrate the utility of these tools to historical analysis. 
While acknowledging these challenges to my dissertation is crucial, I also want to briefly discuss the advantages and merit of this project. 

Though the choice of this particular dissertation topic was the product of many incremental decisions, I remain committed and excited for this project for two reasons. The first reason is my shift towards focusing my project on Cairo’s press and media infrastructure as a window into these larger phenomenon. I believe this history is critical for understanding the longer legacy of this anti-colonial moment in Cairo, and for exploring the relationship between revolutionary movements and government censorship. I also believe that diplomatic and international historians have not engaged fully with media as an analytical category for their research, instead treating it solely as a source of archival material. I see my project as a counterpoint, placing media front and center in my study, and tracing how the media was a bellwether for much larger political debates and changes. Furthermore, my general scholarly interests for some time have been moving towards the intersection of media history and international history, and now my project will contribute to those fields. The second reason is that this project allows me to experiment with a novel methodology that I believe will help discover new ways for managing historical sources and writing historical narratives. Though this method could hypothetically work for any project, I believe studying anti-colonial Cairo is well suited to these tools, and I am looking forward to uncovering new connections and insights that will hopefully further our understanding of this moment.