**"Constructing Anti-Colonial Cairo: The United Arab Republic, News Media, and Anti-Colonialism During Decolonization and the Cold War"**

In his weekly “From the Editor” letter in September 1964, Dr. Abdul Hamid El-Batrik, Editor in Chief of The Arab Observer: The Non-Aligned Weekly, depicted a Cairo as a city ascendant. No longer sidelined internationally, Cairo was now a leader among revolutionary states and ideas, and consequently, a hub for international news agencies, who had “been racing to keep up with Egyptian events”. According to Dr. El-Batrik, this new prominent global position for Cairo was proof of the Free Officers’ revolutionary promise - to transform Egypt (NOTE:  I use the term United Arab Republic (U.A.R.) and Egypt ) into an independent nation.  While independence in 1952 was largely defined as opposing British rule, by 1964, Egypt’s name had changed to the United Arab Republic, and so too had its definition of independence, which was now premised on opposing imperialism beyond its borders as the winds of decolonization swept across the globe. To El-Batrik, the United Arab Republic had finally arrived at its rightful place on the international stage when even foreign newspapers acknowledged "Cairo’s vitality as a meeting place for new ideas." (NOTE:  Same letter “From the Editor” by Dr. Abdul Hamid el-Batrik, Editor in Chief of The Arab Observer: The Non-Aligned Weekly, issue no. 220, September 7, 1964.) 

Yet, even prior to El-Batrik’s heralding of Cairo’s new role in international politics, others, like the leftist intellectual Jean Lacouture, remained skeptical of the U.A.R.’s ability to fulfill its revolutionary promises. In an earlier published work, Egypt in Transition, Lacouture cautioned that “Cairo runs a serious risk of losing most of its influence once it ceases being a place of appeal for unsatisfied protests, a kind of unreachable promised land for Arab independence.”(NOTE: Jean Lacouture, Egypt in Transition 1958 (218).) For Lacouture, the U.A.R.’s promotion of anti-colonial politics was one based in words and not actions. Prior to the Arab Spring, Lacouture’s skepticism of Cairo seemed to have largely been validated with the anti-colonial world breaking apart over the course of the 1960s and much of the U.A.R's radicalism and leadership of the Arab world disapearing under Sadat. Yet, the protests that erupted in Tahrir Square in January 2011 have in some ways shined a new light on this history, and reignited debates over the role of revolutionary ideas and movements in reshaping the region and the larger global order.

While much has changed in Egypt since the days of Nasser, one through line between the Tahrir of the 1950s and 60s with the one of the 2010s is that this battle over the future of Egypt and its place in the world was not solely waged on the streets, but also in the pages of magazines and newspapers, across radio waves and television broadcasts, and today, on the web and social media. Yet, while countless pieces have heralded the importance of new media in fomenting the Arab Spring across the region, analysis of how new, and old, media reshaped the decolonizing world remains limited. With regards to Egypt, scholars have explored in depth its media output as one of the foremost media producers in the Arab world, but rarely has this research questioned how Egypt’s media infrastructure was part and parcel of constructing global anti-colonialism in the 1950s and 60s. This neglect has resulted in a gap between the literature on post-colonial Egypt and the scholarship on global anti-colonialism, with histories of Egypt's media culture neglecting the international and scholars of global anti-colonialism neglecting the U.A.R. and its media infrastructure in their narratives) As a consequence our understandings of Cairo and its news media are incomplete, and so too are our understandings of (NOTE:  I primarily use news media to refer to information media - that is the newspapers, academic journals, radio, and television. The difference between news media and other forms of media, especially mass media, is something I am still working through and would appreciate any advice on how to parse these categories.) international debates over decolonization, modernity, and sovereignty during this anti-colonial moment. \* \*

My dissertation rectifes this gap, exploring how the U.A.R. utilized various media outlets to produce and propagate ideas about anti-colonialism furthering both their revolution at home and a vision of the new Third World, with Cairo as one of its capitals. Anti-colonial movements have a long genealogy, yet the 1950s and 60s have largely been understood as an exceptional period for anti-colonialism. In the case of Egypt, I argue that the convergence of the revolution in Egypt, the rise of the Bandung spirit, and the solidifying of the Cold War produced a new internationalism in Cairo, one that blurred the boundaries between the local, national, regional, and global. Moreover, during the 1950s and 60s, for places like Cairo, I believe that international events and internal politics became so deeply intertwined that the raison d’etre for the nation became enmeshed with a vision for a new postcolonial international order, one forged through the bonds of anti-colonial struggle. 

Through the lens of Cairo’s news media, I trace how the U.A.R. attempted to realize this postcolonial vision through a combination of Arab, African, Non-Aligned, Afro-Asian, and Islamic solidarities and policies that aimed to solidify the Free Officers’ power both at home and abroad. To uncover this vision, I focus discourses around anti-colonialism in Cairo’s media as the conceptual thread underlying the U.A.R.’s efforts in this period. (NOTE:  In my dissertation, I use anti-colonialism as an umbrella term for a broader discourse that included terms like anti-imperialism, decolonization, neutralism, neo-colonialism, and non-alignment. The choice of anti-colonialism rather than these other terms has to due with the prevalence in the term in the historical record, but also its very brief appearance at this historical moment. I realize that there might be some slippage with my usage of this historical term as an analytic category, but for now its the most accurate description of this phenomenon.) The use of vision rather than ideology is also deliberate. Though the UAR promoted neutralism and socialism, official policy was often more the result of pragmatism than firm ideological stances - a reality that often confounded observing Cold War superpowers. Even though this anti-colonial vision was nebulous, it played a central role in legitimizing the new regime, and in helping the regime challenge power structures, whether an older European empire or newly emerging Cold War superpower.(NOTE:  The use of empire and superpower here is a false dichotomy since both were seen as imperial forces shaping the Third World. Nonetheless, these terms do signify the shifting power dynamics that shaped this moment.) I argue that focusing on Cairo’s news media institutions and content provides an entry point to consider both Cairo’s place in the larger anti-colonial world, as well as the international role of Cairo’s anti-colonial media and press. (NOTE:  The anti-colonial press has largely been overshadowed by the more well studied black and radical presses. At this moment the three overlap a great deal, but in my project, I explore how the anti-colonial press was often sponsored by newly decolonized states.) Reconnecting these histories helps elucidate how this moment shaped the relationship between these decolonizing states and the media, both local and international, which continues to have profound reprecussions for debates over political legitimacy, censorship, and freedom of the press.

Weaving these threads together, my project explores how Cairo emerged as a leading hub for anti-colonial ideas and movements, focusing on three central questions. First and foremost, what role did Cairo's media play in producing and propagating anti-colonialism?  Cairo’s diverse media landscape included everything from films, television dramas, radio programs, daily newspapers, magazines, and academic journals. While all of these outlets were part of envisioning anti-colonialism in Cairo, the news media represents a particularly rich resource. Many studies have utilized Cairo’s newspapers as a source, but few have considered how the production of the news was constitutive in constructing the politics of anti-colonialism. For example, though reporting on events, the discourses and symbolism deployed in the coverage about places like Havana and Algiers or people like Lumumba and Nkrumah were often part of this larger vision of anti-colonial project in Cairo. Thus, exploring the content and forms in news media during this era helps makes visible how discourses about anti-colonialism were constructed and circulated across the pages of newspapers and played across radio broadcasts. My project seeks to utilize this content analysis as a foundation for exploring which publications and authors were most central in this information network that spread ideas about anti-colonialism both within and beyond Cairo.  Ultimately, I argue this approach makes visible the broader information landscape that helped craft these anti-colonial discourses in Cairo's news media. 

Focusing on news media also enables an exploration of the relationship between news and propaganda. The media was one of the first spheres that the revolutionary government sought to control, and Nasser and his compatriots were well aware of the media’s potential to both legitimize the revolution and the government’s policies. Over the course of the 1950s, freedom of the press was continually contested, as the regime vacilated from shuttering publications to cooperating with editors to spread their revolutionary message. This back and forth between direct government control and a more open press eventually came to a head in the summer of 1960, when the government quasi-nationalized the press under the auspices of the Arab Socialist Union, a government controlled organization.(NOTE:  The exact degree of censorship and the mechanisms are debated in the current literature. While some like Charles Tripp argue that the Egyptian government did not censor every word, others like Laura James maintain that the presence of government 'editors' in each press functioned as a direct form of censorship. My dissertation will not try to resolve this debate, but rather through my content-analysis I will explore whether patterns of censorship emerge - that is ideas and direct phrasing being repeated in multiple publications around the same time.) How did narratives about anti-colonialism in the media bolster and diverge from official government positions? In foreign dispatches from Cairo, the news media was often viewed as a mouthpiece for the regime. In fact, Nasser often yielded a direct hand in the press, and key members of government, like Anwar Sadat, at times held positions of influence as directors or editors at the main dailies. Yet, the press in Egypt still maintained a fairly diverse range of publications and voices. In part, the multitude of newspapers and magazines was the direct result of government involvement, as government- funded presses were a pillar of the revolutionary mandate to re-educate the Egyptian populace. However, even though journalists often had to refrain from outright critique of the regime, the media was not solely transmitting the views of the government. This question of who exactly controlled the press created a blurriness between reporting and rumors, as well as between what constituted official and speculative statements in the press. This haziness enabled the U.A.R. to hedge its politics - sometimes publishing more radical views publicly, but reassuring other countries privately. However, this strategy often strained foreign relations. Furthermore, the active involvement of the government in the news media set the foundation for widespread government censorship that continues into the present. While this longer history is beyond the scope of this project, placing news media at the center of this study is central for exploring how the new revolutionary government tried to control news media, which helped the U.A.R. in spreading its anti-colonial message, but at the cost of undermining trust in both the press and the government.

More so than any other anti-colonial capital, Cairo aspired to be an international media capital, using a range of mediums to challenge imperialism across the globe and assert its leadership in anti-colonial movements. Beginning in the 1950s, but truly gaining prominence in the early 1960s, Cairo’s radio and print media, and to a lesser degree television and film media, circulated not only in the Arab World, but across the decolonizing and radical socialist world. Radio Cairo was especially successful in reaching decolonizing African states, and Cairo’s English- language magazines, like The Arab Observer, became part of a broader anti-colonial media network that stretched from Havana to Delhi. Western officials often expressed concern over the impact of Cairo’s message, and sought to counter it with their own public diplomacy efforts. This transformation of Cairo into an international news media hub was an essential mission of the Free Officers, yet the reception ofto Cairo’s efforts were often mixed. To that end, how was Cairo’s leading role in international anti-colonialism reinforced in its news media, and how was this vision received beyond the U.A.R.? Within and from Cairo, the U.A.R. disseminated this revolutionary political vision, which attracted many leftist activists and intellectuals to Cairo. However, as Lacouture criticized, such expansive rhetoric often had unexpected consequences - whether creating skepticism regarding the true intentions of the U.A.R. or embroiling the U.A.R. in disputes beyond its borders. While Western observers’ reactions to Cairo’s efforts to extend its influence were generally less than positive, the response in other decolonizing capitals varied. Understanding the reception to the Cairo’s media and message also requires exploring how Egyptian efforts to construct this media infrastructure were part of a larger endeavor to build alternatives to Western press outlets, like Reuters and Associated Press, that were seen as biased in their coverage of the decolonizing world. Ultimately, considering the influence of Cairo’s anti-colonialism and international reception to the U.A.R. highlights how news media was central in constructing competing political narratives about the meanings of anti-colonialism.  

In histories of the Middle East and North Africa, Nasser’s Egypt has received extensive coverage, especially relative to other decolonizing states in this region. Much of this work has explored the ways that Nasser legitimized his revolution and developed the idea of Arab Socialism - a central thread in my project. In particular, my project builds on the research of Joel Gordon, Reem Abou el Fadl, Rami Ginat, and Laurie Brands who have all explored this intersection of ideology, international solidarities, and internal politics that the U.A.R. government deployed to re-envision and transform Egyptian society. Joel Gordon and Laura Bier’s writings on the cultural representations of anti-colonialism in Egyptian film and women’s periodicals respectively have also been influencedtial in my conception of symbolism of anti-colonialism in Egyptian media. In regards to studies of Egyptian media, there’s a rich scholarship, though the majority of this literature focuses on the post-1990s era of new media. Furthermore, this research is often in the form of anthropological studies, exploring the impact of new media on religious and political sensibilities in Egypt. Though a useful foundation for my study, I hew more closely to the methodology of Walter Ambrust, who has critiqued Arab media studies for its lack of historical methods and the work of William Rugh, who has written extensively on the Arab news media and its relationship to the state. My project most directly builds on the work of Laura M. James and her book, *Nasser at War.*\* \*James raises many of the questions that I have outlined here, exploring the use of Egyptian press and new radio technologies to spread Nasser’s radical rhetoric across the Arab world. My project expands on James’ work, adopting a much wider geographic perspective beyond the Arab world to include other decolonizing regions and utilizing a larger selection of Egyptian news media materials for my analysis.

My emphasis on the larger international dimensions of Cairo’s anti-colonialism is derived in part from the growing scholarship on the Cold War and decolonization. In the last few years there has been a resurgence in studies exploring the previously marginalized movements of neutralism, non-alignment, and Afro-Asianism. The works of Robert Rakove, Philip Muhlenbeck, Frank Gerits, George Roberts, and David Stenner have been particularly helpful - both as model and for their subject matter, shedding light on competing and alternative visions for this post-colonial world than those produced in Cairo. Furthermore, Jeffrey Byrne and Michael Goebel’s recent books both provide exemplary studies of how to marry urban and international history, studying the global impact of Algiers and Paris respectively. Yet, though Nasser and the United Arab Republic are often mentioned in these studies, the history of Cairo’s anti-colonialism remains largely on the margins. Two exceptions to that rule are the works of Guy Laron that explore the international dimensions of the United Arab Republic during the Suez Crisis and James Brennan who has explored the impact of Cairo’s media in East Africa. Brennan is one of a growing number of scholars that are media as a site for public diplomacy during the Cold War. These scholars have increasingly demonstrated how radio, public exhibitions, libraries, and imagery were part of American foreign policy during this period. (NOTE: Works on public diplomacy that have most influenced my dissertation include: Heather Hendershot's What's fair on the air?: Cold War Right-Wing Broadcasting and the Public Interest; Kenneth A. Osgood and Brian C. Etheridge's The United States and Public Diplomacy: New Directions in Cultural and International History; Andrew Wulf's U.S. International Exhibitions During the Cold War: Winning Hearts and Minds Through Cultural Diplomacy; and Sönke Kunkel's Empire of Pictures : Global Media and the 1960s Remaking of American Foreign Policy.) My project draws from this literature, but expands their focus from the American or Soviet context towards the Third World. Thus, my project combines the research on Nasser’s Egypt, especially the works that have examined the Arab World’s reception to Nasser and the U.A.R.; the field of Arab media studies and broader histories of news media; and new internationalist histories of the Cold War and decolonization, particularly those that focus on public diplomacy and the media. 

My sources are primarily newspapers, periodicals, official publications, and government speeches produced in Cairo. Chiefly in Arabic, English, and French, these sources were created for a wide spectrum of publics. Though, due to the degree of government control of the press, these sources represent a window into the government’s understanding of events, rather than a lens into public opinion about these events. Future iterations of this project will attempt to integrate radio and television into my analysis. Nonetheless, these print materials present a robust corpus for exploring how the meaning of anti-colonialism fluctuated over this period, as well as how the message produced in Cairo varied depending on venue and language. I also explore the imagery of anti-colonialism in these printed materials, primarily in the form of cartoons and photographs, to add a further dimension to my analysis of the symbolism of anti-colonialism. 

In placing news media at the heart of my project, the newspapers and periodicals I study are in many ways my historical actors. While I do explore some of the autobiographies of key writers and government officials, the ability of these sources to answer the questions I raise, specifically about the broader anti-colonial ideational and media networks are limited. Instead, I explore how various print sources propagated anti-colonial discourses, looking at the use of particular symbols, events, and places to ascribe meaning to these ideas. I believe that this method helps extend my project from simply being an examination of Nasser and other top government officials towards an analysis of the larger community that produced this anti-colonial vision. For example, this strategy allows me to include non-Egyptians like David Graham Du Bois and Maya Angelou, who worked at *The Arab Observer *and *The Egyptian Gazette*. (NOTE:  A further benefit of this method is the ability to eventually map anti-colonial activity within Cairo. The majority of explicitly anti-colonial activity in Cairo was centralized in areas like Zamalek, Tahrir Square, Heliopolis, and even Missions City, where government funded initiatives supported non-Egyptians. However, there are few existing archival sources from residents in these neighborhoods or these government-funded programs, and thus, this approach helps elucidate these spaces.)  I also explore newspaper coverage of Cairo in other anti-colonial hubs, such as Algiers, Accra, and Delhi. Exploring the response to Cairo in other anti-colonial capitals helps qualify and clarify the footprint of the U.A.R.’s anti-colonialism, which is critical as Nasser and his surrogates often envisioned their influence far beyond the U.A.R.’s borders. I also utilize the dispatches of the American and British embassies in Cairo to bring into focus when words and actions diverged in Cairo. However, this project is not seeking to offer the definitive account of every anti-colonial activity in Cairo, or pass judgement on the sincerity of this anti-colonialism. Rather, I combine these sources to delve into the narratives and rumours surrounding Cairo’s anti-colonialism. 

Looking at news media also highlights the growing tension between actions and words, and between international and internal goals in Cairo over the course of the 1960s. As Jeffrey Byrne, Robert Rakove, and others have argued, international anti-colonial solidarities around ideas like non-alignment started to breakdown by the mid-1960s. However, my project continues to trace these anti-colonial discourses into the early 1970s. This expanded periodization is crucial for understanding how the anti-colonial internationalist coalition of the 1950s and 60s split, and states like Tanzania and Libya replaced the U.A.R. as a sponsor of revolutionary radical movements. Most studies of the U.A.R. end in 1970 with Nasser’s death and Anwar Sadat’s unexpected rise to power. Yet, these works have neglected to explore the connections between Nasser’s anti-colonialism and Sadat’s attempts to form unions with Libya, Sudan, Syria, and Iraq through the Federation of Arab Republics in the early 1970s. My project concludes on this question and argues that the internationalist anti-colonial discourses of the Nasserist era did not outright disappear, but were transformed under Sadat, from internationalist rhetoric that privileged political union to one that privileged economic treaties and liberalization as the basis for both the global order and the future of Egypt. This final point will hopefully be expanded in subsequent works, but ending my project in the early 1970s helps elucidate the contours of this anti-colonial moment, and forces us to reconsider both the successes and failures of these movements.

This project represents one piece of a larger historical puzzle - making sense of how the end the end of empire and the creation of new nation states in the mid-twentieth century transformed the international political order, but also reified existing economic and political hierarchies. The choice of Cairo to explore these questions is intentional, though many other cities in Egypt, such as Aswan or Port Said, or in the decolonizing world, such as Algiers, Accra, Belgrade, Conakry, Havana, are potential case studies. Yet, Cairo, relative to its importance for these movements, remains among the most understudied of all the places that were part of the end of colonialism. Furthermore, Cairo was one of the few anti-colonial capitals to actively construct an international media infrastructure. Even though Cairo has been relatively neglected, this question about the dynamics of the decolonizing moment has been the subject for many historians. Most notably the so-called imperial revisionists historians, like Fred Cooper, who have demonstrated that the demise of European empires were often contingent and piecemeal. My work builds on their insights, however, as Samuel Moyn and Michael Goebel have noted, this scholarship has been rife with a tendency of overstating the potential of alternate visions of post-independence, such as federalism or some type of continental unity. For Moyn and Goebel, these scholars have failed to consider why the nation state overwhelmingly became the preferred political unit across the globe, regardless of previous colonial experience or post-independence political ideology. While my work explores the diversity of alternative political visions produced and disseminated in Cairo, I also explore how calls for pan-Arab, pan-African, and non-aligned unity in the media often reaffirmed the new Egyptian state. 

Ultimately, this project studies the ways in which news media, propaganda, clandestine activities, public spectacles, and visions for the U.A.R.’s future all combined to construct a new identity for Cairo - as a hub for anti-colonialism. Studying Egyptian media highlights how Nasser and his government tried to control this narrative, and assert their vision for an anti-colonial international order from Cairo. Yet, contextualizing this narrative within a larger global one underscores how differing perceptions of the U.A.R.’s actions and goals stymied this vision. Finally, in exploring these narratives, we can trace how the breakdown of anti-colonial solidarities in the mid-1960s laid the foundation for new solidarities around a re-imagined international economic order. This transformation had profound implications for the emerging Third World, Egypt’s place in international politics, and ultimately, the structure of international news media. Thus, tracing this shift is imperative for rethinking anti-colonialism in Cairo during the 1950s and 60s, understanding the legacies of these internationalist politics into the 1970s and beyond, and uncovering the influence of this earlier anti-colonial media on our current international news media structures. 
