"The world, as well as the UAR press, has been racing to keep up with Egyptian events. Scarcely a month passes without an important conference, meeting or seminar taking place in Cairo. Correspondents of some international agencies and newspapers seem to be running a shuttle service between their countries and their Middle East headquarters. One can count half a dozen of these meetings going on at the moment in Cairo, as well as another half dozen in preparation." - “From the Editor” by Dr. Abdul Hamid el-Batrik, Editor in Chief of The Arab Observer: The Non-Aligned Weekly, issue no. 220, September 7, 1964.

"Cairo runs a serious risk of losing most of its influence once it ceases being a place of appeal for unsatisfied protests, a kind of unreachable promised land for Arab independence. The Egyptian capital glitters in the eyes of the Maghreb people merely on account of the Algerian tragedy. As soon as a settlement is reached between the north and south of Mediterranean, Cairo will be no more than the Arab East’s most imposing and fascinating cultural and religious centre." Jean Lacouture, Egypt in Transition 1958 (218)

In his weekly “From the Editor” letter in September 1964, Dr. Abdul Hamid El-Batrik, Editor in Chief of The Arab Observer: The Non-Aligned Weekly, depicted a Cairo as a city ascendant. No longer sidelined internationally, Cairo was now a leader among revolutionary states and ideas, and consequently, a hub for international news agencies, who had “been racing to keep up with Egyptian events”. According to Dr. El-Batrik, this new prominent global position for Cairo was proof of the Free Officers’ revolutionary promise - to transform Egypt (NOTE:  I use the term United Arab Republic (U.A.R.) and Egypt ) into an independent nation.  While independence in 1952 was largely defined as opposing British rule, by 1964, Egypt’s name had changed to the United Arab Republic, and so too had its definition of independence, which was now premised on opposing imperialism beyond its borders as the winds of decolonization swept across the globe. To El-Batrik, the United Arab Republic had finally arrived at its rightful place on the international stage when even foreign newspapers acknowledged "Cairo’s vitality as a meeting place for new ideas." (NOTE:  Same letter “From the Editor” by Dr. Abdul Hamid el-Batrik, Editor in Chief of The Arab Observer: The Non-Aligned Weekly, issue no. 220, September 7, 1964.) 

Yet, even prior to El-Batrik’s heralding of Cairo’s new role in international politics, others, like the leftist intellectual Jean Lacouture, remained skeptical of the U.A.R.’s ability to fulfill its revolutionary promises. In an earlier published work, Egypt in Transition, Lacouture cautioned that “Cairo runs a serious risk of losing most of its influence once it ceases being a place of appeal for unsatisfied protests, a kind of unreachable promised land for Arab independence.”(NOTE: Jean Lacouture, Egypt in Transition 1958 (218).) For Lacouture, the U.A.R.’s promotion of anti-colonial politics was one based in words and not actions. Prior to the Arab Spring, Lacouture’s skepticism of Cairo seemed to have largely been validated with the anti-colonial world breaking apart over the course of the 1960s and many of the U.A.R's promises going unfulfilled. Yet, the protests that erupted in Tahrir Square in January 2011 reignited these debates over the role of revolutionary ideas and movements in reshaping the world order.

While much has changed in Egypt since the heady days of Nasser, one through line between the Tahrir of the 1950s and 60s with the one of the 2010s is that this battle over the future of Egypt and its place in the world was not solely waged on the streets, but also in the pages of magazines and newspapers, across radio waves and television broadcasts, and today, on the web and social media. Yet, while countless pieces have heralded the importance of new media in fomenting the Arab Spring across the region, analysis of how new, and old, media reshaped the decolonizing world remains limited. With regards to Egypt, scholars have explored in depth its media output as one of the foremost media producers in the Arab world, but rarely has this research questioned how Egypt’s media infrastructure was part and parcel of constructing global anti-colonialism in the 1950s and 60s. This neglect has resulted in a gap between the literature on post-colonial Egypt and the scholarship on global anti-colonialism, and as a consequence, our understandings of the role of news media (NOTE:  I primarily use news media to refer to information media - that is the newspapers, academic journals, radio, and television. The difference between news media and other forms of media, especially mass media, is something I am still working through and would appreciate any advice on how to parse these categories.) in debates over decolonization, modernity, and sovereignty is incomplete.\* \*
